In the previous section,
we looked at ways of authenticating a user with what the user knows.
An additional layer of protection is something they have.
A common approach is the user's cell phone as
almost everyone has one these days,
either by sending them a one-time password via SMS or a one-time software
token generated on an application installed on their phone,
like the Google Authenticator.
Now Google Authenticator supports either time-based one-time password
algorithm or HMAC-based one-time password algorithm.
Now the way the time-based one works is the server generates a secret key.
That is then provided to the Google Authenticator app on the user's
phone generally using a quick reference code.
The Authenticator app then stores the secret key.
And when authentication is required,
the server and the Authenticator app use the time,
the secret key, and the TOTP algorithm to generate a one- time code.
The server will generate a number of codes from a range of
times around the current time in case the server or the
user's phone is a bit fast or slow.
If the codes match, the user authenticates.
You can implement two-factor authentication in many different flavors.
Banking websites tend to make it mandatory for all users
and require it every time they log in.
For our demo site,
we will give the user the option to enable two-factor authentication using Google Authenticator.